---
title: Notes on videogame development
---

## Reality check

- <https://www.gamespot.com/shows/reality-check/>

## How do bullets work in games

- <https://www.gamespot.com/videos/how-do-bullets-work-in-games/2300-6448382/>

## Drawing Lines is Hard

> Drawing lines might not sound like rocket science, but itâ€™s damn difficult to do well in OpenGL,
> particularly WebGL. Here I explore a few different techniques for 2D and 3D line rendering, and
> accompany each with a small canvas demo.

Source: <https://mattdesl.svbtle.com/drawing-lines-is-hard>

## Crafting Stylised Mouse Trails With OGL

Source: <https://tympanus.net/codrops/2019/09/24/crafting-stylised-mouse-trails-with-ogl/>

### A Brief, Early History of Computer Graphics in Film

John Whitney, Sr., also known for the slit-scan technique that produced the
visually powerful "into the monolith" imagery of 2001: A Space Odyssey, is
often credited with bringing computer graphics to the film industry. He
experimented with war-surplus analog computer control mechanisms from
antiaircraft weapons to control the motion of a camera in the late 1950s and
1960s, producing a number of short animations and television commercials. He
continued his work with computer imagery, always seeking to create harmonic,
algorithmic motions, producing some very attractive mandala-like imagery in a
series of short animations through the 1970s and 1980s.

Ivan Sutherland's 1962 MIT thesis on an interactive computer graphics
interface, called Sketchpad, demonstrated for the first time the power of
computer graphics as a method for controlling and interacting with computers,
and served as a great inspiration to other researchers. The University of Utah
and the New York Institute of Technology fostered rich environments for this
fledgling science, producing a crop of computer graphics researchers and
techniques that have helped to shape the field.

The first feature film to use digital image processing was Westworld, in
1973--the same year as the first SIGGRAPH conference. John Whitney Jr. and Gary
Demos at Information International Inc. (III; aka "Triple I") provided
digitally processed, pixellated versions of motion photography to portray an
android point of view. The same group used digital compositing to materialize
characters over a background in the 1976 sequel, Futureworld. These efforts
were recognized with a Scientific & Engineering Academy Award in 1994.

In 1977 Star Wars used what was probably the first example of 3D computer
graphics in film, albeit in the form of vector or wireframe, rather than
shaded, imagery. Larry Cuba, in what was then called the Circle Graphics
Habitat (now the Electronic Visualization Laboratory, or EVL) at the University
of Illinois at Chicago Circle, created a 3D wireframe view of the trench of the
Death Star that was used to train rebel pilots. This film also featured a rare
example of analog 3D computer graphics--a very brief, false color image of the
Deathstar emerging from behind a planet--created using the Scanimate system.

In 1979 Ridley Scott's Alien was released and made limited, but effective use
of 3D computer graphics, again in the form of vector or wireframe graphics.
Systems Simulation Ltd. of London created a computer monitor sequence showing a
terrain fly-over, rendering computer-generated mountains as wireframe images,
with hidden line removal.

The first feature film to use shaded 3D computer graphics imagery, rendered in
the style used today, was 1981's Looker. Polygonal models obtained by
digitizing a human body were used to render the effects, which were again
created at III. After working on the effects for Looker, John Whitney Jr. and
Gary Demos were instrumental in the pitching and preproduction of the next big
CGI film, Tron, but left III before its production to form Digital Productions.

The film many people associate with the (difficult) birth of Hollywood computer
graphics is Disney's Tron, released in 1982. The effects for Tron were created
by a number of fledgling production facilities: III, Magi Synthavision, Digital
Effects (of New York), and Robert Abel and Associates. Despite its intriguing
and attractive imagery, the poor critical and public response to Tron, as a
film, together with some delays and difficulties during production, put a chill
on the CGI industry that probably slowed its growth for a time. Indeed, most of
the CGI production companies involved in Tron are no longer in business and
none are currently involved in computer graphics production. All of these
companies produced television commercials for a time during the 1980s, and Gary
Demos, while still at III, produced some unused and seldom seen but impressive
test footage of an X-wing fighter for Star Wars. The polyhedron character,
"Bit", in Tron is probably the first CGI "character", though it was
deliberately designed to have a sufficiently limited range of controls and
animation that it is debatable whether this work qualifies as true character
animation.

In 1982 Paramount released Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, which contained a
one minute CGI sequence depicting a simulation of the birth of a planet (the
"Genesis Effect"), created by Pixar, a LucasFilm spin-off that would go on to
produce Oscar-winning computer graphics in the years to come. The Genesis
Effect made the first onscreen use of a particle rendering system to achieve
its fiery effects.

In all of the films to this point, computer graphics had been used to
portray... computer graphics. Throughout its early years in Hollywood,
sophisticated CGI of the day was used to show what computers of the future
might look like, whether from the outside, as in the monitor displays of Alien
and Khan, or, as in Tron, from the "inside".

In 1984 Digital Productions created the first photorealistic computer graphic
images for a feature film, The Last Starfighter, using a Cray X-MP
supercomputer. Here the computer images were integrated with live action as
realistic scene elements, rather than as monitor graphics or computer-generated
imagery. Instead of the film industry's traditional models and miniatures,
computer graphics were used to create all the spaceships, planets, and
high-tech hardware in the film. Also at Digital Productions: Larry Yaeger and
Craig Upson combined computational fluid dynamics with CGI, for the first time,
to create the planet Jupiter in 2010 (1984); Larry Yaeger and Bill Kroyer
designed, animated, and technical directed the flying owl in the award-winning
opening title sequence of Labyrinth (1986); and Bill Kroyer animated Mick
Jagger's "Hard Woman" rock video (1986). Digital Productions also created a
string of Clio award-winning television commercials during the 1980s, and
produced some impressive test footage for a few special projects, including
Dune (1984) and Star Trek: The Next Generation, prior to its television
premiere in 1987. Digital film scanning and compositing work at Digital
Productions was also subsequently recognized with a Scientific & Engineering
Academy Award in 1995.

Digital Productions was purchased, along with Robert Abel & Associates, by
Omnibus Computer Graphics in 1986, and all three organizations closed their
doors in 1987. Omnibus Computer Graphics also produced the silvery, reflective
spaceship for Flight of the Navigator (1986).

In 1984, musical group Dire Straits came out with a classic rock video for
their song, "Money for Nothing", featuring a low-detail, but very engaging
animated CGI character, animated by Ian Pearson, Gavin Blair, and David
Throssell at a London-based company called Rushes.

In 1985 Pixar produced what is arguably the first CGI character animation in a
feature film--the stained-glass-window-come-to-life effect for Young Sherlock
Holmes (the primary contender being the simple polyhedron character, Bit, in
Tron). Unlike their Genesis Effect, Pixar used more traditional rendering and
texture-mapping techniques in this film. In the early days, however, Pixar was
probably better known for their John Lasseter-directed series of short
subjects, including the Oscar-nominated "Luxo, Jr.," (1986) and the
Oscar-winning "Tin Toy" (1988). With John Lasseter directing, Pixar also went
on to produce the first all-CGI animated film, the Oscar-nominated Toy Story
(1995).

ILM/LucasFilm produced some unique special effects for The Abyss (1989) and
Terminator 2 (1991). Though used quite differently in these two films, both
sets of effects were based on traditional rendering techniques coupled with
methods for dynamically warping the shapes of 3D objects and 2D images known as
morphing (ILM actually first showed its image morphing techniques in the less
commercially successful Willow (1988)). The firm has also created television
commercials and music videos using these techniques, and further popularized
CGI effects for film in the Jurassic Park films (1993, 1997).

Other computer graphics production for television commercials has been done by
the now-defunct Cranston-Csuri Productions, its successor MetroLight Studios,
the Robert Abel spin-off Rhythm and Hues, and the oldest surviving (and still
thriving) computer graphics production house, Pacific Data Images.
DeGraf/Wahrman, a Digital Productions spin-off, produced effects for the film
version of The Jetsons (1990). In addition, the dropping prices of graphics
workstations and the growing capabilities of microprocessor-based systems have
given rise to smaller independent production houses such as Homer and
Associates, and Kleiser-Walczak, as well as some in-house production at various
film studios.

Computer graphics has also given a behind-the-scenes assist to traditional
animation in film, going back to Disney's The Black Hole (1979), in most Disney
films since The Great Mouse Detective (1986), and in Kroyer Films' FernGully:
The Last Rainforest (1992). Disney brought computer graphics back in front of
the camera to provide the ballroom interior scenes for Beauty and the Beast
(1991).

Though far from an exhaustive list of all computer graphics effects for film, I
believe this summary does hit, and accurately date, most of the early
landmarks.

Soerce: [Westword](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westworld_(film))
