---
title: Notes on writting
---

## Quotes by Neil Gaiman to Help You Write Your Novel 

1. Rule one, you have to write. If you don’t write, nothing will happen.

2. Know safely what the rules are, and then break them with joy.

3. Whenever I did something where the only reason for doing it was money,
normally something would go terribly wrong. And I normally wouldn’t get the
money and then I wouldn’t have anything. Whereas, whenever I did anything where
what prompted my doing it was being interested, being excited, caring, thinking
this is going to be fun, even if things went wrong and I didn’t get the money,
I had something I was proud of.

4. Everything is driven by characters wanting different things, and by those
different things colliding. Every moment that one character wants something,
and another character wants something mutually exclusive, and they collide —
every time that happens, you have a story. If you get stuck, ask yourself what
your characters want — and that is like a flashlight. It shines a light on the
road ahead and lets you move forward. It’s the only question that opens the
door to ‘What do you do next?’

5. I think that the joy of world building in fiction is honestly the joy of
getting to play God. Because as an author, you get to build the world.

6. You learn more from finishing a failure than you do from writing a success.

7. I learned to write by writing. I tended to do anything as long as it felt
like an adventure, and to stop when it felt like work, which meant that life
did not feel like work.

8. ‘**And then what happened?**’ Those words, I think, are the most important
words there are for a storyteller. Anything you can do to keep people turning
the pages is legitimate.”

9. **Dialogue is character**. The way that somebody talks, what they say, how
they say it is character. And dialogue has to show character. It also has to
show plot. And maybe it can be funny along the way.

10. You always have to remember, when people tell you that something doesn’t
work for them, that they’re right. It doesn’t work for them. And that is
incredibly important information. You also have to remember that when people
tell you what they think is wrong and how you should fix it, that they’re
almost always wrong.

Source:
- [A Dozen Quotes by Neil Gaiman to Help You Write Your Novel](https://writingcooperative.com/a-dozen-quotes-by-neil-gaiman-to-help-you-write-your-novel-5d3366bde1f)


